.. currentmodule:: control

.. _version-0.10.0:

Version 0.10.0 Release Notes
----------------------------

* Released: 31 March 2024
* `GitHub release page
  <https://github.com/python-control/python-control/releases/tag/0.10.0>`_

This release changes the interface for plotting to use a
``_response/_plot`` calling pattern, adds multivariable interconnect
functionality, restructures I/O system classes, and adds the `norm`
(now `system_norm`) function to compute input/output system norms.
Support for the NumPy `~numpy.matrix` class has been removed.

This version of `python-control` requires Python 3.10 and higher.


New classes, functions, and methods
...................................

The following new classes, functions, and methods have been added in
this release:

* `time_response_plot`, `TimeResponseData.plot`: Plot simulation
  results for time response functions.

* `InterconnectedSystem.connection_table`: Print out a table of each
  signal name, where it comes from (source), and where it goes
  (destination), primarily intended for systems that have been
  connected implicitly.

* `nyquist_response`, `NyquistResponseData`: Compute the Nyquist curve
  and store in an object that can be used to retrieve information
  (e.g., `~NyquistResponseData.count`) or for plotting (via
  the `~NyquistResponseData.plot` method).

* `describing_function_response`, `DescribingFunctionResponse`: Compute
  describing functions and store in a form that can be used for
  analysis (e.g., `~DescribingFunctionResponse.intersections`) or plotting
  (via `describing_function_plot` or the
  `~DescribingFunctionResponse.plot` method).

* `gangof4_response`, `gangof4_plot`: Compute the Gang of Four
  response and store in a `FrequencyResponseData` object for plotting.

* `singular_values_response`: Compute the Gang of Four response and store in a
  `FrequencyResponseData` object for plotting.

* `FrequencyResponseData.plot`: Plot a frequency response using a Bode,
  Nichols, or singular values plot.

* `pole_zero_map`, `PoleZeroData`: New "response" (map) functions for
  pole/zero diagrams.  The output of `pole_zero_map` can be plotted
  using `pole_zero_plot` or the `~PoleZeroData.plot` method.

* `root_locus_map`: New "response" (map) functions for root locus
  diagrams.  The output of `root_locus_map` can be plotted using
  `root_locus_plot` or the `~PoleZeroData.plot` method.

* `norm` (now `system_norm`): Compute H2 and H-infinity system norms.

* `phase_plane_plot`: New implementation of phase
  plane plots.  See :ref:`phase-plane-plots` for more information.


Bug fixes
.........

The following bugs have been fixed in this release:

* `sample_system`: Fixed a bug in which the zero frequency (DC) gain
  for the 'matched' transformation was being computed incorrectly.

* `TimeResponseData.to_pandas`: Fixed a bug when the response did not
  have state data.


Improvements
............

The following additional improvements and changes in functionality
were implemented in this release:

* `interconnect`: Allows a variety of "multivariable" specifications
  for connections, inputs, and outputs when systems have variables
  with names of the form 'sig[i]'.

* `nlsys`: Factory function for `NonlinearIOSystem`.

* Block diagram functions (`series`, `parallel`, `feedback`, `append`,
  `negate`) now work on all I/O system classes, including nonlinear
  systems.

* Simulation functions (`initial_response`, `step_response`,
  `forced_response`) will now work for nonlinear functions (via an
  internal call to `input_output_response`).

* Bode and Nyquist plots have been significantly enhanced in terms of
  functionality for display multiple tracing and other visual
  properties.  See `bode_plot` and `nyquist_plot` for details, along
  with the :ref:`response-chapter` chapter.

* Properties of frequecy plots can now be set using the
  `config.defaults['freqplot.rcParams']` (see
  :ref:`package-configuration-parameters` for details).

* `create_statefbk_iosystem`: Allows passing an I/O system instead of
  the a gain (or gain schedule) for the controller.

* `root_locus_plot`: Interactive mode is now enabled, so clicking on a
  location on the root locus curve will generate markers at the
  locations on the loci corresponding to that gain and add a message
  above the plot giving the frequency and damping ratio for the point
  that was clicked.

* `gram`: Computation of Gramians now supports discrete-time systems.

* All time response functions now allow the `params` keyword to be
  specified (for nonlinear I/O systems) and the parameter values used
  for generating a time response are stored in the `TimeResponseData`
  object..


Deprecations
............

The following functions have been newly deprecated in this release and
generate a warning message when used:

* `connect`: Use `interconnect`.

* `ss2io`, `tf2io`: These functions are no longer required since the
  `StateSpace` and `TransferFunction` classes are now subclasses of
  `NonlinearIOSystem`.

* `root_locus_plot`, `sisotool`: the `print_gain` keyword has been
  replaced `interactive`.

* In various plotting routines, the (already deprecated) `Plot`
  keyword is now the (still deprecated) `plot` keyword.  This can be
  used to obtain legacy return values from ``_plot`` functions.

* `phase_plot`: Use `phase_plane_plot` instead.

The listed items are slated to be removed in future releases (usually
the next major or minor version update.


Removals
........

The following functions and capabilities have been removed in this release:

* `use_numpy_matrix`: The `numpy.matrix` class is no longer supported.

* `NamedIOSystem`: renamed to `InputOutputSystem`

* `LinearIOSystem`: merged into the `StateSpace` class

* `pole`: use `poles`.  The `matlab.pole` function is still available.

* `zero`: use `zeros`.  The `matlab.zero` function is still available.

* `timebaseEqual`: use `common_timebase`.

* The `impulse_response` function no longer accepts the `X0` keyword.

* The `initial_response` function no longer accepts the :code:`input`
  keyword.

* The deprecated default parameters 'bode.dB', 'bode.deg',
  'bode.grid', and 'bode.wrap_phase' have been removed.  They should
  be accessed as 'freqplot.dB', 'freqplot.deg', 'freqplot.grid', and
  'freqplot.wrap_phase'.

* Recalculation of the root locus plot when zooming no longer works
  (you can still zoom in and out, you just don't get a recalculated
  curve).

Code that makes use of the functionality listed above will have to be
rewritten to work with this release of the python-control package.
