.. currentmodule:: control

.. _version-0.10.2:

Version 0.10.2 Release Notes (current)
--------------------------------------

* Released: date of release
* `GitHub release page
  <https://github.com/python-control/python-control/releases/tag/0.10.2>`_

This release contains numerous bug fixes and improvements, including
substantial updates to the documentation, including refactoring of the
online manual into a User Guide and a Reference Manual, as well as
more consistent and complete docstrings. In addition, signals and
systems can now be referenced using signal labels in addition to
offsets, and phase plane plots make use of the matplotlib
`~matplotlib.pyplot.streamplot` function.  Numerous other changes have
been made to improve consistency of keyword arguments and function
names, with legacy aliases available.

This version of `python-control` requires Python 3.10 or higher, NumPy
1.23 or higher (2.x recommended), and SciPy 1.8 or higher.


New classes, functions, and methods
...................................

The following new classes, functions, and methods have been added in
this release:

* `find_operating_point`: this function replaces (with a legacy alias)
  the `find_eqpt` function and now returns an `OperatingPoint` object
  containing the information about the operating point.

* `combine_tf` and `split_tf`: these two new functions allow you to
  create an MIMO transfer function from SISO transfer functions and
  vice versa.

* `create_statefbk_iosystem` now allows the creation of state feedback
  controllers using a "reference gain" pattern (:math:`u = k_\text{f}\,
  r - K x`) in addition to the default "trajectory generation" pattern
  (:math:`u = u_\text{d} - K(x - x_\text{d})`).

* `disk_margins`: compute disk-based stability margins for SISO and
  MIMO systems.

* `model_reduction`: allow specific states, inputs, or outputs to be
  either eliminated or retained.

* `place_acker`: renamed version of `acker` (which is still accessible
  via an alias).


Bug fixes
.........

The following bugs have been fixed in this release:

* `phase_plane_plot`: fixed a bug in which the return value was
  returning a sublist of lines rather than just a list of lines in
  `cplt.lines`.

* Processing of the timebase parameter (`dt`) for I/O systems is now
  handled uniformly across all I/O system factory functions.  This
  affected the `zpk` function, which was defaulting to a discrete time
  system to have timebase None instead of 0.

* Multiplying (*), adding (+), or subtracting (-) a constant from any
  (MIMO) LTI object now acts element-wise (same as ndarray's). This
  fixes a bug where multiplying a MIMO LTI system by a constant was
  multiplying by a matrix filled with the constant rather than a
  diagonal matrix (scaled identity).

* Fixed a bug where specifying an FRD system with fewer than 4
  frequency points was generating an error because the default
  settings try to set up a smooth (interpolating) response and the
  default degree of the fit was 3.

* Fixed some bugs where computing poles and zeros of transfer
  functions could generate spurious error messages about unsafe
  casting of complex numbers to real numbers.

* `TimeResponseData.to_pandas`: multi-trace data (e.g., the output
  from a MIMO step response) was not being processed correctly.  A new
  column 'trace' is now generated for multi-trace responses.

* Fixed a bug where where some arguments to `nyquist_plot` were not
  being processed correctly and generated errors about unrecognized
  keywords.

* Updated `ctrb` and `obsv` to handle 1D `B` or `C` matrix correctly.

* `bode_plot`: Fixed missing plot title when `display_margin` keyword
  was used.

* `singular_values_plot`: color cycling was not working correctly when
  a list of systems or responses was provided.

* `nyquist_plot`: The `lines` parameter of the `ControlPlot` object
  now matches the documentation.  A 2D array is returned with the
  first index corresponding to the response (system) index and the
  second index corresponding to the segment type (primary, mirror x
  unscaled, scaled).

* Fix some internal bugs that cropped up when using NumPy 2.3.1 but
  were latent prior to that.


Improvements
............

The following additional improvements and changes in functionality
were implemented in this release:

* User documentation is now divided into a User Guide that provides a
  description of the main functionality of the python-control package,
  along with a Reference Manual describing classes, functions, and
  parameters in more detail.

* Signal responses and I/O subsystem specifications can now use signal
  names in addition to indices to get the desired inputs, outputs, and
  states (e.g., `response.outputs['y0', 'y1']`).  This is implemented
  via a new `NamedSignal` object, which generalizes `numpy.ndarray`.

* `find_operating_point` (legacy `find_eqpt`): accepts new parameters
  `root_method` and `root_kwargs` to set the root finding algorithm
  that is used.

* `root_locus_map` now correctly handles the degenerate case of being
  passed a single gain.

* The `PoleZeroData` object now takes a `sort_loci` parameter when it
  is created, with a default value of True.  This is useful if you
  create a `PoleZeroData` object by hand (e.g., for producing stability
  diagrams).

* Factory functions for I/O system creation are now consistent in
  terms of copying signal/system names, overriding system/signal
  names, and converting between classes.

* The `tf` factory function to allow a 2D list of SISO transfer
  functions to be given as a means of creating a MIMO transfer
  function (use the new `combine_tf` function).

* The `nlsys` factory function can now create a `NonlinearIOSystem`
  representation of a `StateSpace` system (passed as the first
  argument to `nlsys`).

* LTI systems now have member functions for computing the various time
  responses and generating frequency domain plots.  See `LTI.to_ss`,
  `LTI.to_tf`, `LTI.bode_plot`, `LTI.nyquist_plot`, `LTI.nichols_plot`
  and `LTI.forced_response`, `LTI.impulse_response`,
  `LTI.initial_response`, `LTI.step_response`.

* String representations of I/O systems (accessed via `repr`, `print`,
  and `str`) have been updated to create a more consistent form and
  provide more useful information.  See
  :ref:`displaying-lti-system-information` for more information.

* Binary operations between MIMO and SISO functions are now supported,
  with the SISO system being converted to a MIMO system as if it were
  a scalar.

* `nyquist_response`: generates an error if you force the system to
  evaluate the dynamics at a pole.

* `phase_crossover_frequencies`: turned off spurious warning messages.

* `ss2tf`: added new `method=scipy` capability, allowing `ss2tf` to
  work on MIMO systems even if Slycot is not present.

* `flatsys.solve_flat_optimal` (legacy `flatsys.solve_flat_ocp`):
  allows scalar time vector.

* Improved checking of matrix shapes and better error messages in
  state space factory functions and other operations where matrices
  are passed as arguments.

* `FrequencyResponseData`: use `~FrequencyResponseData.complex` to
  access the (squeeze processed) complex frequency response (instead
  of the legacy `response` property) and
  `~FrequencyResponseData.frdata <FrequencyResponseData>` to access
  the 3D frequency response data array (instead of the legacy `fresp`
  attribute).

* Time response and optimization function keywords have been
  regularized to allow consistent use of keywords across related
  functions:

  - Parameters specifying the inputs, outputs, and states are referred
    to as `inputs`, `outputs`, and `states` consistently throughout the
    functions.

  - Variables associated with inputs, outputs, states and time use
    those words plus an appropriate modifier: `initial_state`,
    `final_output`, `input_indices`, etc.

  - Aliases are used both to maintain backward compatibility and to
    allow shorthand descriptions: e.g., `U`, `Y`, `X0`. Short form
    aliases are documented in docstrings by listing the parameter as
    ``long_form (or sf) : type``.

  - Existing legacy keywords are allowed and generate a
    `PendingDeprecationWarning`.  Specifying a parameter value in two
    different ways (e.g., via long form and an alias) generates a
    `TypeError`.

* `phase_plane_plot`: makes use of the matplotlib
  `~matplotlib.pyplot.streamplot` function to provide better default
  phase plane diagrams.

* `root_locus_plot`: added by the ability to recompute the root locus
  when zooming in on portions of the root locus diagram.

* `nyquist_plot`: updated the rescaling algorithm to use a more
  gradual change in the magnitude of the Nyquist curve.  The
  `blend_fraction` parameter can be used to start the rescaling prior
  to reaching `max_curve_magnitude`, giving less confusing plots. Some
  default parameter values have been adjusted to improve Nyquist
  plots.


Deprecations
............

The following functions have been newly deprecated in this release and
generate a warning message when used:

* `FrequencyResponseData.response`: use
  `FrequencyResponseData.complex` to return the complex value of the
  frequency response.

* `FrequencyResponseData.fresp`: use `FrequencyResponseData.frdata
  <FrequencyResponseData>` to access the raw 3D frequency response
  data array.

The listed items are slated to be removed in future releases (usually
the next major or minor version update).
